---
layout: post
title: What's right, what's reasonable?
subtitle: First post
cover-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/path.jpg
tags: [philosophy]
---

Bear with me, this is the first post and I'm writing this as much as a test of my new website as it is something I should have gotten out of my head and onto a page for a while now.

### What's right
Moral philosophy tells us to reason from first principles. A great example of this is Rawls' reflective equilibrium.

Step one: Come up with some principles and see what ethical conclusions they entail.

Step two: Consider your intuitions and if your conclusions cohere or clash with them.

Step three: If you find your conclusions are at odds with your intuition, then revise one of them and repeat steps one and two.

Step four: Now you know what the just life / society looks like.

### What's reasonable
Unforunately, it's not qutie this simple. Often times we don't even realize when our principles are at odds with our intuitions. Sometimes we know this but just sit with the dissonance, unsure of which one needs to change. Moreover, even if the principles win out, there's very little room for human cognition, psychology, emotionality, and the limitations therein. So even if the principles are right, are they reasonable?

I've been thinking about this clash for a number of reasons. Consider for example how one should give his / her / their money. To maximize the greatest good, one can still do no better than donating money to less developed countries. Purchasing mosquito nets to prevent malaria. [Around $1.50 per net can prevent one case of Malaria potentially saving that person's life.]("https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/11693869/#:~:text=The%20impregnated%20net%20program%20was,1%20case%20of%20prevented%20malaria).") Contrast this with giving a dollar to every houseless person you come across in the United States, or giving to charity at your place of worship.

For many people, myself included, the latter activities feel better emotionally and spiritually. They are more immediate and more salient to us. But the mosquito nets are far more efficient. The research spells out that the mosquito nets on a dollar for dollar basis purchase more years of human life and avert more suffering.

The right thing to do is to buy the nets, but should you, and even if you should will you?

### The COVID Context
The other main reason I've been thinking about this is of course the Novel Coronavirus. The right thing to do consistently has been for people to stay home, suppress the disease, protect our country's most vulnerable. People for a variety of reasons have had difficulty adhering to these strictures during these long 11 months. I'm hard pressed to be angry at them. Confused perhaps but not angry. People are lonely. People are sad. People are bored! I understand activities like sporting events are frivolous (this coming from someone who quite likes them and misses them), and attending them is wrong in the princpled sense, but is it reasonable.

I don't really have a strong conclusion here. I've been stuck in neutral on this topic for nearly a year across a whole host of topics. There's of course the Bay Area liberal appeal to mindfulness and compassion when people transgress your principles. But I think there's a larger point here that conceptions of the good life have to be able to fold in what's actually reasonable for people to execute. I'm not the first to acknowledge this. Rawls did which is why he was agnostic about the actual structure of the just society. Not only that but Communitarianism -- one of the most effective critiques of Rawls -- leverages human triablism to motivate its reasoning.

#### End.