---
layout: post
title: Evicted
subtitle: A comprehensive but incomplete picture
cover-img: /assets/img/evicted.jpg
thumbnail-img: /assets/img/thumb.png
share-img: /assets/img/evicted.jpg
tags: [books]
---

Some front matter context on why I'm late to the party here talking about a book that was hugely celebrated when it came out in early 2016:

I just started a new job and this workplace has a book club. The first read on the list when I joined was _Evicted_. Unfortunately work has gotten in the way of said book club actually meeting for two weeks hence and as a result I am *brimming* with thoughts on this book that I read eagerly. So here we go, better late than never.

#### Desmond's work is a hugely impressive piece of Sociology and Ethnography

This is probably not news to you. Desmond, at the time a PhD candidate at the University of Wisconsin (Madison) embeds himself in several locations around Milwaukee, WI and proceeds to earn the trust of, shadow, and rigorously document the lives and transactions of rougly eight families at or around the poverty line who are struggling with housing instability. The level of detail, accuracy, and methodological purity he uses to make this a true Ethnography is nothing short of breathtaking and is truly an academic contribution of a lifetime.

What's more, his ability to take his tomes of exhaustive notes and documentation and spin them into a coherent narrative is all the more impressive. The narrative Desmond spins is disorienting -- but it should be. The confusion the reader feels as the book ricochets across families, geographies, and time periods effectively destabilizes the reader and puts him or her in the same disoriented headspace these housing insecure individuals and families occupy. The characters in this book have their lives upset again and again by a veritable Rube Goldberg apparatus of external shocks that force them from their homes time and again, each time leaving them with fewer options with which to scrape by.

At this, Desmond and Evicted excel. If you opened the book thinking housing instability or poverty were merely a failure of personal responsibility or a one time run of bad luck this book will very effectively dispel that notion. The characters live in squalor, are unable to sleep, must care for children, loved ones, contribute to a deceased loved one's funeral, attend appointments to continue receiving federal income assistance and for all kinds of reasons fall behind on rent. Their social circle sometimes helps them but often hinders them. Some characters struggle with drug addiction. Others were sexually abused and must navigate poverty in spite of their mental health concerns. Add to that the clear message that once you are evicted once, you're effectively caught in a cycel of eviction, and it's very easy to see why the problems of homelesness and housing insecurity are such difficult ones to solve.

Lastly, Desmond backs up his ethnographic work with quantitative survey work to add context on Milualkee's housing insecure community. Here is the cherry on top that gives the reader some idea of if what they're reading is representative of larger trends or not. But it's the inattention to these larger trends (and historical trends) that troubles me.

#### No room for structure

Where the book falls short is in its relative myopia. As I sat there turning pages, I kept wondering why there was no discussion of context or historical factors that put the main chararacters in these circumstances. I kept wondering what it must be like for someone reading this book who was not from the U.S. or had no knowledge of its racial and political history, in my head that reader would wonder things like:

>"Goshy why are so many of these characters non-white? Why are drug and alcohol abuse so prevalent and why in particular are so many characters addicted to midcally prescribed narcotics? Why isn't the welfare system more functional and why are the neighborhoods so segregated? And why do so many of the characters have mental health issues and no access to care?"

Answers to any or all of these questions would give important context to the book. Eventually, in the book's final section, Desmond gets around to making an omage to the same kind of history that Ta-Nehisi Coates so effectively illustrates in his famous [essay]("https://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2014/06/the-case-for-reparations/361631/") _The Case for Reparations_ on how slavery, Jim Crow, and policy as recent as the New Deal contributed to heavy social, political, and economic segregation between whites and nonwhites. This is really important context for the reader to understand why the characters are mostly forced to live in slums. Without it, the reader just accepts the description of that status quo and thinks to himself, "huh that's weird."

This same frustrating applies to the other contextual factors I brought up. It would help the reader enormously to understand that Paul is not a singular case with his opioid addiction but is actually an avatar for a national crisis that we only began to recognize in 2016 and have done little to solve since.

#### Hiding the ball

It takes until the book's lengthy afterword for Desmond to explain why the book omits so much of this context. To him the housnig debate in the U.S. is dominated by Conservatives on one hand who claim poverty is caused by a moral failure of personal responsibility, and Liberals on the other who claim the problem is caused by structural forces that are too large, complicated, and deep seated to do anything about.

This confession then makes clear why he chooses to ignore the structural forces and focus instead on the day to day compilcations of his characters' lives, except those complications are themselves *caused* by the structural forces he ignores. Additionally, it's a mischaracterization for him to say all Liberals and Progressives who acknowledge the structural context are too lazy to solve the problem. Ironically at the very tail end of the book he brings up some popular policy proposals such as housing subisides that many progressives support!

Ultimately, I come away understanding what this book is and is not and I appreciate it for what it does to well as I've tried to make clear above. I understand no singular contribution to the literature can do all things. But ultimately this book that attempts to tell an exhaustively detailed and comprehensive story of the failures of the American social safety net feels incomplete and that shadow hangs over the book like the spectre of next month's rent check.